Widget support revisions (#698)
smartdevicelink/sdl_evolution: proposals/0216-widget-support.md

    <description>
      This is the unique ID assigned to the window that this RPC is intended. If this param is not included, it will be assumed that this request is specifically for the main window on the main display. See PredefinedWindows enum. 
    </description>
  </param>
</function>
```

The window ID is told to the HMI by the app using `CreateWindow`. If a user taps on an app icon to launch the app, the HMI activates the app sending `OnAppActivated` to SDL Core with `windowID = 0` which points to the application's main window. The HMI flow of widgets is independent of the flow for main windows. 

Widgets created should be stored in a list of available widgets by the HMI. This list should use the app icon and the window name when showing the list to a user. The HMI level of these widgets is `HMI_NONE` and they are not visible on the HMI. A user can select or deselect widgets from this list to be added to the HMI. This means they can be added to a widget area or to a specific widget slot (depends on HMI implementation). The HMI will notify Core about widgets that are select to be part of the HMI using `OnAppActivated` with the widget's window ID. 

> Widgets that are part of the HMI are not necessarily visible to the user. The display of the infotainment system can present content other than widgets. While a widget is added to the HMI but not visible it should be in `HMI_BACKGROUND`. If a widget becomes visible on the HMI, the HMI should send `OnAppActivated` with the widget's window ID to move the widget to `HMI_FULL`. There could be multiple widgets presented at the same time (from one app or from multiple), which means multiple widgets can be in `HMI_FULL`. Widgets that become invisible on the HMI should be deactivated by the HMI using `OnAppDeactivated` to transit them from `HMI_FULL` to `HMI_BACKGROUD`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Widgets that are part of the HMI are not necessarily visible to the user. The display of the infotainment system can present content other than widgets. While a widget is added to the HMI but not visible it should be in `HMI_BACKGROUND`. If a widget becomes visible on the HMI, the HMI should send `OnAppActivated` with the widget's window ID to move the widget to `HMI_FULL`. There could be multiple widgets presented at the same time (from one app or from multiple), which means multiple widgets can be in `HMI_FULL`. Widgets that become invisible on the HMI should be deactivated by the HMI using `OnAppDeactivated` to transition them from `HMI_FULL` to `HMI_BACKGROUND`.
```

![HMI level chart for windows](../assets/proposals/0216-widget-support/hmi-chart.png)

> Figure: The chart shows possible transitions between the HMI levels for main windows and widget windows. It shows that the HMI level transitions are independent from other windows.

### Window manipulation

The RPC `Show` and `SetDisplayLayout` are identified as the only window related RPCs apps can send. In order to allow an app to address a specific window, these two RPCs need to be changed.

#### `SetDisplayLayout`

The information contained in the deprecated parameters will be made available with the newly proposed window capability struct. In the next major release these parameters can be marked as removed.

```xml
<function name="SetDisplayLayout" functionID="SetDisplayLayoutID" messagetype="request" deprecated="true" since="5.x">
    <description>This RPC is deprecated. Use Show RPC to change layout.</description>
</function>

<function name="SetDisplayLayout" functionID="SetDisplayLayoutID" messagetype="response" deprecated="true" since="5.x">
    <description>This RPC is deprecated. Use Show RPC to change layout.</description>
</function>
```

> > Note: The alternative solution describe how to refactor `SetDisplayLayout` and keep the same structure as earlier. Above solution to add a new parameter in `Show` RPC is more clean, which is why it's the primary proposed solution. Either way works and can be chosen by the steering committee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: The alternative solution describes how to refactor `SetDisplayLayout` and keep the same structure as earlier. Above solution to add a new parameter in `Show` RPC is more clean, which is why it's the primary proposed solution. Either way works and can be chosen by the steering committee.
```

    </description>
  </param>
  
  <param name="layout" type="String" maxlength="500" mandatory="true">
    <description>
        Predefined or dynamically created window layout.
        Currently only predefined window layouts are defined.
    </description>
  </param>

  <param name="dayColorScheme" type="TemplateColorScheme" mandatory="false" />
  <param name="nightColorScheme" type="TemplateColorScheme" mandatory="false" />
</function>

```

This allows the app to use the full flexibility of the `Show` RPC for main window as well as for widgets.

As the app can present soft buttons on different locations, it is more important to protect uniqueness of the button IDs. Every soft button ID used by the app should be unique throughout the whole system. Example: If an app developer presents a soft button on the main window with ID=1, the app must not use the same ID on any other window. If the app wants to present two buttons for the same button action, the app developer must use a different ID.

> The color scheme parameter are related to the app's color scheme. Setting a new color scheme parameter will change the color scheme of all windows of the app. Color scheme parameters will ignore the window ID parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The color scheme parameters are related to the app's color scheme. Setting a new color scheme parameter will change the color scheme of all windows of the app. Color scheme parameters will ignore the window ID parameter.
```

### Window capabilities

> The RPCs `RegisterAppInterfaceResponse` and `SetDisplayLayoutResponse` contain parameters about display and window capabilities including text, image and button capabilities. This approach of providing capabilities is outdated and a new system capability feature is ready to take over. In order to provide a more modern API desgin and ability to resize or reposition windows, this proposal should move metadata out of the repsonse RPCs into a system capability RPC. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RPCs `RegisterAppInterfaceResponse` and `SetDisplayLayoutResponse` contain parameters about display and window capabilities including text, image and button capabilities. This approach of providing capabilities is outdated and a new system capability feature is ready to take over. In order to provide a more modern API design and ability to resize or reposition windows, this proposal should move metadata out of the response RPCs into a system capability RPC. 
```

```xml
<struct name="WindowTypeCapabilities" since="5.1">
  <param name="type" type="WindowType" mandatory="true" />
  <param name="maximumNumberOfWindows" type="Integer" mandatory="true" />
</struct>
```

#### Struct `DisplayCapability`

To hold window capabilities, the display capabilities should contain the display related information and all windows related to that display.

```xml
<struct name="DisplayCapability" since="5.x">
  <param name="displayName" type="String" mandatory="false" />
  <param name="windowTypeSupported" type="WindowTypeCapabilities" array="true" minsize="1" mandatory="false">
    <description>
      Informs the application how many windows the app is allowed to create per type. 
    </description>
  </param>
  <param name="windowCapabilities" type="WindowCapability" array="true" minsize="1" maxsize="1000" mandatory="false">
    <description>
      Contains a list of capabilities of all windows related to the app.
      Once the app has registered the capabilities of all windows are provided.
      GetSystemCapability still allows requesting window capabilities of all windows.

>       After registration only windows with capabilities changed will be included. Following cases will cause only affected windows to be included:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      After registration, only windows with capabilities changed will be included. Following cases will cause only affected windows to be included:
```

>       1. App creates a new window. After the window is created a system capability notification will be sent related only to the created window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      1. App creates a new window. After the window is created, a system capability notification will be sent related only to the created window.
```

4. System sends `OnHMIStatus` notification 
5. System sends `OnPermissionsChange` notification

The display capabilities should contain *all* windows available immediately after registration. This is important for app resumption when widgets are reused by a hash ID in the app registration.

Another scenario is changing the layout using `Show`:

1. App sends `Show` which includes `layout` parameter
2. System responds with `ShowResponse`
3. System sends `OnSystemCapability` notification with display capabilities

Different to registration the notification should contain only the affected window.

> With this proposal the scenario of creating a new window should be similar to set a new layout:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this proposal the scenario of creating a new window should be similar to setting a new layout:
```

1. App sends `CreateWindow`
2. System responds with `CreateWindowResponse`
3. System sends `OnSystemCapability` notification with display capabilities

> Again, different to registration the notification should contain only the affected (created) window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, different from registration, the notification should contain only the affected (created) window.
```

### App Resumption

If the app registers with a resumption ID and this ID is recognized by the HMI, all windows created by the application will resume including widgets and their content (text, images and buttons). The `OnSystemCapabilityUpdate` notification will provide information of the resumed windows. 

## Potential downsides

> Moving window metadata will cause more effort for OEMs and app consumers to implement this feature. The metadata needs to be sent twice, in the responses but also in the system capability notification. However, since the data is basically a copy it is expected as an acceptable effort in favor of an improved API design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving window metadata will require more effort from OEMs and app consumers to implement this feature. The metadata needs to be sent twice, in the responses but also in the system capability notification. However, since the data is basically a copy it is expected as an acceptable effort in favor of an improved API design.
```

## Impact on existing code

There are additional RPCs `CreateWindow` and `DeleteWindow` that need to be added. In addition to this `Show`, `SetDisplayLayout` and `OnHMIStatus` need to be extended with a `windowID` parameter.

After investigating impact to SDL Core, the impact is expected to be minor. Global approach remains the same for now. The following items have been identified as affected by this proposal:
1. Changes to RPC service as new RPCs and parameters are introduced
2. Changes to State Controller to allow HMI level transitions for widgets and windows
3. Changes to Request Controller as RPCs from one app can be addressed to different windows

The window managers should be refactored to read window capabilities notifications as well as the deprecated parameters.

## Additional features

> This section describes a possible feature to allow widgets per app or service type. Instead of providing only app specific widgets, an infotainment systems with widget support can also offer widgets per type. As an example The infotainment system can offer a "Media Player" widget which will present the widget of the active/audible media application. This can include media sources offered by the infotainment system such as Radio, Bluetooth or USB playback. A similar user experience can be offered to other app types like navigation, weather, (voice) communication or telephony, voice assitant etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes a possible feature to allow widgets per app or service type. Instead of providing only app specific widgets, an infotainment system with widget support can also offer widgets per type. As an example, the infotainment system can offer a "Media Player" widget which will present the widget of the active/audible media application. This can include media sources offered by the infotainment system such as Radio, Bluetooth or USB playback. A similar user experience can be offered to other app types like navigation, weather, (voice) communication or telephony, voice assistant etc.
```

There are different approaches to provide this feature.

### App HMI type

```xml
<function name="CreateWindow" messagetype="request">
  :
  <param name="widgetType" type="AppHMIType" mandatory="false">
    <description>
      Allows an app to create a widget related to a specific HMI type.
      As an example if a `MEDIA` app becomes active, this app becomes audible and is allowed to play audio. Actions such as skip or play/pause will be

>       directed to this active media app. In case of widgets, the system can provide a single "media" widget will acts as a placeholder for the active media app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      directed to this active media app. In case of widgets, the system can provide a single "media" widget which will act as a placeholder for the active media app.
```

>       It is only allowed to have one window per HMI type. This means that a media app can only have a a single MEDIA widget. Still the app can create widgets omitting this parameter or with specifying the HMI type `DEFAULT`. Those widgets would be available to the user independent of the HMI type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      It is only allowed to have one window per HMI type. This means that a media app can only have a a single MEDIA widget. Still the app can create widgets omitting this parameter or by specifying the HMI type `DEFAULT`. Those widgets would be available to the user independent of the HMI type.
```

      This parameter is related to widgets only. The default main window, which is pre-created during app registration, will be created based on the HMI types specified in the app registration request.
    </descripion>
  </param>
</function>
```

Allows an app to create a widget related to a specific HMI type.
As an example if a `MEDIA` app becomes active, this app becomes audible and is allowed to play audio. Actions such as skip or play/pause will be

> directed to this active media app. In case of widgets, the system can provide a single "media" widget will acts as a placeholder for the active media app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directed to this active media app. In case of widgets, the system can provide a single "media" widget which will act as a placeholder for the active media app.
```

> It is only allowed to have one window per HMI type. This means that a media app can only have a a single MEDIA widget. Still the app can create widgets omitting this parameter or with specifying the HMI type `DEFAULT`. Those widgets would be available to the user independent of the HMI type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is only allowed to have one window per HMI type. This means that a media app can only have a single MEDIA widget. Still the app can create widgets omitting this parameter or by specifying the HMI type `DEFAULT`. Those widgets would be available to the user independent of the HMI type.
```

This parameter is related to widgets only. The default main window, which is pre-created during app registration, will be created based on the HMI types specified in the app registration request.

The benefit of `AppHMIType` is the linkage to embedded features such as embedded navigation and media/radio. Another benefit is the the ability to use policy management. The application can only create widgets for app types that are allowed according to policies.

### Service type

```xml
<function name="CreateWindow" messagetype="request">
  :
  <param name="widgetType" type="AppServiceType" mandatory="false">
    <description>
      Allows an app to create a widget related to a specific service type.
      As an example if a `MEDIA` app becomes active, this app becomes audible and is allowed to play audio. Actions such as skip or play/pause will be

>       directed to this active media app. In case of widgets, the system can provide a single "media" widget will acts as a placeholder for the active media app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      directed to this active media app. In case of widgets, the system can provide a single "media" widget which will act as a placeholder for the active media app.
```

      
      It is only allowed to have one window per service type. This means that a media app can only have a single MEDIA widget. Still the app can create widgets omitting this parameter. Those widgets would be available as app specific widgets that are permanently included in the HMI.

      This parameter is related to widgets only. The default main window, which is pre-created during app registration, will be created based on the HMI types specified in the app registration request.
    </descripion>
  </param>
</function>
```

Allows an app to create a widget related to a specific service type.
As an example if a `MEDIA` app becomes active, this app becomes audible and is allowed to play audio. Actions such as skip or play/pause will be

> directed to this active media app. In case of widgets, the system can provide a single "media" widget will acts as a placeholder for the active media app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directed to this active media app. In case of widgets, the system can provide a single "media" widget which will act as a placeholder for the active media app.
```

It is only allowed to have one window per service type. This means that a media app can only have a single MEDIA widget. Still the app can create widgets omitting this parameter. Those widgets would be available as app specific widgets that are permanently included in the HMI.

This parameter is related to widgets only. The default main window, which is pre-created during app registration, will be created based on the HMI types specified in the app registration request.

> The benefits of using `AppServiceType` is the ability to also have weather as a generic widget and possible future improvements with service manifest data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benefit of using `AppServiceType` is the ability to also have weather as a generic widget and possible future improvements with service manifest data.
```

## Alternatives considered

To reduce complexity on the head unit, window duplication can be supported by the SDL libraries. This could allow more flexibility to display duplication for existing windows. However, this increases the number of RPCs to be sent by the app and the user might see a delay in window updates (duplication not being synchronized).

> In order to reduce state machine complexity for widget HMI levels on SDL core side, the HMI can take control of HMI level transitions for widgets. However this might cause different behavior per HMI implementation which could be confusing to developers as the behavior is not consistent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to reduce state machine complexity for widget HMI levels on SDL Core side, the HMI can take control of HMI level transitions for widgets. However this might cause different behavior per HMI implementation which could be confusing to developers as the behavior is not consistent.
```

> It is possible to have a manual subscription to display capabilities. This is definitely a possible solution as the SDL managers will perform the capabilities subscription. However, as this subscription will be made for 100% of the apps and as subscribing takes more time sending RPCs it was considered that autosubscription improves performance in this case. Without the automatic subscription, this redesign would perform worse than the current design of returning the information in a response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to have a manual subscription to display capabilities. This is definitely a possible solution as the SDL managers will perform the capabilities subscription. However, as this subscription will be made for 100% of the apps and as subscribing takes more time than sending RPCs, it was determined that autosubscription improves performance in this case. Without the automatic subscription, this redesign would perform worse than the current design of returning the information in a response.
```

> Another alternative, similar to above, allows manual subscritpion but with automatic notifications after `RegisterAppInterfaceResponse` and `SetDisplayLayout`, regardless of the subscription. This would allow applications to subscribe, in order to get notified on HMI changes related to the window caused by the system or the user. Still it provides automatic notifications if the window related HMI change is caused by the app (e.g. by changing the layout). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another alternative, similar to above, allows manual subscription but with automatic notifications after `RegisterAppInterfaceResponse` and `SetDisplayLayout`, regardless of the subscription. This would allow applications to subscribe, in order to get notified of HMI changes related to the window caused by the system or the user. Still it provides automatic notifications if the window related HMI change is caused by the app (e.g. by changing the layout). 
```

> Instead of deprecating `SetDisplayLayout` RPC and adding a new paramter in `Show` RPC, we can refactor the RPC to be called `SetWindowLayout`. This would also prevent overburdenning of `Show` RPC. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of deprecating `SetDisplayLayout` RPC and adding a new parameter in `Show` RPC, we can refactor the RPC to be called `SetWindowLayout`. This would also prevent overburdening of `Show` RPC. 
```

    </description>
  </param>

  <param name="dayColorScheme" type="TemplateColorScheme" mandatory="false" />
  <param name="nightColorScheme" type="TemplateColorScheme" mandatory="false" />
</function>

<function name="SetWindowLayout" functionID="SetWindowLayoutID" messagetype="response" since="5.x">
  <param name="info" type="String" maxlength="1000" mandatory="false" platform="documentation">
      <description>Provides additional human readable info regarding the result.</description>
  </param>
  <param name="success" type="Boolean" platform="documentation" mandatory="true">
    <description> true, if successful; false, if failed </description>
  </param>
  <param name="resultCode" type="Result" platform="documentation" mandatory="true">
    <description>See Result</description>
    <element name="SUCCESS"/>
    <element name="INVALID_DATA"/>
    <element name="OUT_OF_MEMORY"/>
    <element name="TOO_MANY_PENDING_REQUESTS"/>
    <element name="APPLICATION_NOT_REGISTERED"/>
    <element name="GENERIC_ERROR"/>
    <element name="REJECTED"/>
    <element name="UNSUPPORTED_REQUEST"/>
  </param>
</function>
```

## Appendix

### RPC Table

> This table is for referencing which RPCs are display or window addressable. While multiple displays are not yet supported, nor included in this proposal, this table can help see which RPCs will be affected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This table is for referencing which RPCs are display or window addressable. While multiple displays are not yet supported, nor included in this proposal, this table can help show which RPCs will be affected.
```
